Judul : This wild electric salt spoon wants to make healthy soups taste better
Wartawan: Mike Andronico
Isi: Ever wish you could enjoy a deliciously salty meal without the consequences of all that sodium? Kirin’s new Electric Salt Spoon may be able to help you with that. Just as its name suggests, this smart spoon can enhance the flavor of certain low-sodium meals via electric currents. It’s one of the wildest and most attention-grabbing gadgets we’ve seen at CES 2025 so far, but it could also prove to be a genuinely useful kitchen tool for health-conscious folks.

Once I waded through the massive crowd gathering around Kirin’s CES booth, I got my hands on what looked like a pretty standard electric spoon. It’s certainly much larger than the cutlery you have in your cupboard right now, but nothing that would make you bat an eye. The way it works is simple: You tap the little LED button near the middle, and your spoon will provide some tasty simulated sodium via the power of electricity. You can switch between four levels of saltiness, with blue, flashing blue, yellow and flashing yellow representing each increasing level of intensity.

While I got to swoosh the spoon around in a tiny bowl of miso soup, I didn’t get to actually taste it for myself (sharing this thing with mobs of convention-goers would probably be a bit unsanitary). But as an avid ramen enjoyer that should probably keep an eye on his salt intake, I’m very eager to. Kirin — a Japanese food giant whose products you’ve very likely consumed at some point — says it built the spoon in collaboration with various labs and universities, and based on surveys it performed with actual taste testers, says it can make foods taste roughly 1.5 times saltier.

There’s currently no price or release date for Kirin’s Electric Salt Spoon, but we’ll certainly be keeping a close eye on this one to see if it deserves a spot in your cookware collection. In a press release, the company also says it plans to “explore its application in other types of tableware and the development of low-sodium meal options.” I know I’d personally love a corresponding fork that can allow me to finally enjoy my leftovers without applying mounds of unnecessary salt.