Judul : Dr. Rishi Chopra’s anti-aging skin care favorites include this gentle $8 face wash
Wartawan: Rachel Dennis
Isi: Plenty of skin care products promise to lift, firm, brighten and rejuvenate the skin, but what does it actually mean when a skin care product is said to be anti-aging? According to Dr. Rishi Chopra, a Harvard-trained, board-certified dermatologist at UnionDerm in New York City, anti-aging is chiefly viewed through the lens of collagen, which he explains is a fundamental part of our skin and the easiest for us to see clinically and under the microscope.

“When I think about anti-aging, at least from a skin care perspective, I’m looking at [the] ability of a skin care product to prevent the degradation of collagen or produce more collagen so that we can maintain that elasticity and the integrity of the skin,” Chopra says. “There’s a variety of ways that you can do that, and it depends on what the mechanism is, but that’s how I define it as a dermatologist.”

The key to keeping your skin looking as youthful as possible is to adopt good skin care practices sooner rather than later, Chopra says. “Skin care starts at home and it starts early. I tell patients that the earlier you start and the more that you do at home, the less you’ll have to do in the office,” he says. “In your teens and your 20s, you want to maximize your skin care routine at home and that should include the fundamentals — sunscreen, retinol, vitamin C, some type of collagen-boosting or brightening serum, a good cleanser and a moisturizer.”

You don’t need to break the bank to curate an effective skin care routine either, the New York-based derm stresses, though if there’s one item worth the splurge, it’s sunscreen. “I do think it’s important to splurge on the right sunscreen because what we’re finding out more and more is that most of the sunscreen that you’re probably putting on your face isn’t protecting as much against aging as we think,” he says, adding that those sunscreens are great for preventing skin cancer but not the former.

If you want something that’s going to help prevent aging, he recommends looking for sunscreen with high UVA protection. He also recommends people with more melanated skin incorporate a tinted sunscreen into their skin care routine to prevent hyperpigmentation, since he says regular sunscreens do little to nothing to help. “That tint is not just a cosmetic camouflage; it’s a filter, and it also helps prevent aging as well,” he says.

As Chopra notes, investing in the health of your skin or “skinvesting” early on, will pay off down the road both cosmetically and psychologically, whether you’re spending that money on an at-home skin care routine or a clinical procedure. In office, Chopra recommends investing in a resurfacing laser treatment and a wrinkle relaxer, like Jeuveau, which he describes as a newer version of Botox, to reduce the signs of aging.

Ahead, Chopra shares seven of the youth-boosting skin care products he uses in his own skin care routine, along with some additional product recommendations for those with mature skin.