Judul : Best plant identification apps for mobile in 2025, tested by our editors
Wartawan: Pam Baker
Isi: Every year when spring officially arrives, people spend more time in the great outdoors as the season gears up. Whether you’re looking for help identifying plants along your morning hike or designing the flower or food garden of your dreams, there is a mobile plant identification app that can help you. Ditto if you’re wondering if that glossy leaf your loved one pulled up while camping is poison ivy, if that house plant your cat just nibbled on will make it sick or any other particular reason you may have.

“We are driven to identify plants for many reasons,” explains Erin C. Hill, Ph.D., an academic dpecialist in the Department of Plant, Soil and Microbial Sciences at Michigan State University (MSU). “Sometimes it is a curiosity about the world around us,” she writes, and at “other times it is out of the desire or need to manage areas like gardens, agricultural fields, restored habitats, and/or natural preserves.” Dr. Hill’s responsibilities include collaborating on plant and seed identification as a member of MSU’s Plant & Pest Diagnostics team.

In her article, Dr. Hill discusses how plant identification apps for smartphones have seen “significant improvements” over the past several years, and how these apps offer folks “the opportunity to take a photo and get an instant identification in many cases.” With this in mind, we’ve tested five plant identification apps available on Android and iOS that you can use to quickly find out what plant you’re interested in, whether you’re hiking outdoors with loved ones or starting an indoor garden that you want your pets to be safe around.

Over the course of several weeks, we tested FlowerChecker, LeafSnap Premium by Appixi, PlantID by Control, PlantNet and PlantSnap Pro on a Samsung Galaxy Z Fold 4 smartphone. Ultimately, we named PlantNet our top pick due to its level of accuracy that made the process of identifying our test plants a breeze.