‘They’ve never been afraid before’: Why some green card holders’ concerns are growing

Catherine E. Shoichet

A Colorado business owner called her immigration attorney in a panic this week, wrestling with a worry she never expected: If she travels abroad for a conference, could she end up getting deported? A woman from Cameroon who lives in the Midwest made a heartbreaking decision: Flying home for her father’s funeral would be too risky. An immigrant of Palestinian descent cancelled international travel plans — and worried that walking outside their New England home with a keffiyeh they’ve worn for years might no longer be safe. And a Canadian tattoo artist who lives in Washington state shared her fears on social media about an upcoming trip across the border. These four people have never met, and many details of their lives are different. But they share at least one thing in common. They are legal immigrants with green cards — documents deeming them lawful permanent residents of the United States. And they told CNN they’re still scared the Trump administration could kick them out of the country. Immigration lawyer LaToya McBean Pompy says this growing fear is the biggest issue she sees among her clients who have green cards. “They’ve never been afraid before,” she says, “but today, they’re afraid.” Why some green card holders say they’re worried About 12.8 million green card holders live in the United States, according to the latest estimates from the Office of Homeland Security Statistics. And some of them were taken by surprise when authorities detained a former student protest leader at New York’s Columbia University earlier this month. Mahmoud Khalil, who helped lead the school’s student protest movement demanding a ceasefire in Gaza, is married to a US citizen and had a green card. He isn’t facing any criminal charges, but Trump administration officials have accused him of inciting violence and supporting terrorism – claims Khalil’s attorneys and supporters deny. “I think the fact he happened to be a permanent resident underscored the vulnerability of all non-citizens in this country to a lot of people who hadn’t thought it through,” says David Leopold, an immigration attorney in Ohio and former president of the American Immigration Lawyers Association. They’re scared about upcoming travel plans Marina Sinden, a green card holder in Washington state who’s married to a US citizen, is looking forward to visiting her family in Canada for Easter. But the 37-year-old tattoo artist says she’s not looking forward to what she fears might happen when she tries to return to her US home afterward. “I’m really concerned about making the crossing back into the United States. … I have an entire world here to lose if I’m not allowed to re-enter,” Sinden says. Escalating tensions between the US and Canada, plus a recent report of a Canadian woman who was detained at the border for 12 days, are weighing on her. “I’m very concerned about going through an experience like that,” Sinden says. “I own a home here. I own a brick-and-mortar business. I have vehicles. I have children in school. And I have a daughter who says the Pledge of Allegiance to the United States flag every single day.” Sinden says she worries a clerical error in her file from a past green card application could cause confusion, even though she resolved that problem in court, her current green card is valid and she has no criminal record. “I’m concerned that no matter what I’ve done to do the right things (and) respect the rules… I could have my entire life taken from me for a clerical issue … where something was misfiled one time incorrectly,” she says. The stress is something that’s difficult for those who haven’t dealt directly with the US immigration system to understand, says Maria, a 38-year-old business owner in Colorado. She asked to be identified only by her first name out of concern that speaking out could jeopardize her legal status in the US. Maria told CNN she came to the US from Costa Rica when she was 5 years old. She has a green card now, but as a child she was undocumented for years after her family overstayed their visas. “I remember feeling like we couldn’t go to the doctor, we couldn’t go do anything, because the fear of deportation was so real,” she says. “It’s terrible, and now, oh my God, all my childhood traumas and fears are being reignited and lived again — something I never thought I’d have to deal with ever again.” This week, as she prepared to put down a deposit to attend an important work conference abroad, Maria called her lawyer. Even with the green card she’s had for years, the situation feels increasingly uncertain, she says. “He told me, ‘It’s fine, you’re OK, you can go,’” she says. “But am I still scared? Yes.”  
