Cornell student protester told to surrender to ICE as he asks judge to block deportation

Andy Rose

A Cornell graduate student who has been a prominent voice at pro-Palestinian protests – and who faced intense criticism for declaring “glory to the resistance!” after the Hamas attack on Israel that left more than 1,200 dead – is being told to surrender to Immigration and Customs Enforcement, according to a new court filing made shortly after he asked a judge to preemptively order the government not to deport him. Momodou Taal, a doctoral candidate in Africana Studies who is a dual citizen of the United Kingdom and The Gambia and who has twice been suspended by Cornell for alleged disruptive protest activities, said the government was likely preparing to expel him as part of the Trump administration’s efforts to target what they have called antisemitic speech on college campuses. In an email sent to Taal’s attorneys at 12:52 a.m. Friday, a Justice Department lawyer wrote, “ICE invites Mr. Taal and his counsel to appear in-person at the (Homeland Security Investigations) Office in Syracuse at a mutually agreeable time for personal service of the (Notice to Appear) and for Mr. Taal to surrender to ICE custody.” A Notice to Appear is one of the first steps in the formal process of deportation. The email did not specify a deadline for Taal to surrender. “We don’t even know if that notice to appear actually exists. If it did, we think that the Justice Department would have provided us with a copy of it,” Lee said. “It is not yet clear what grounds for removal the government alleges exist here,” Lee said in a filing Friday before federal judge Elizabeth C. Coombe, a Biden appointee. “He lives in constant fear that he may be arrested by immigration officials or police as a result of his speech,” Taal’s attorneys said in a lawsuit filed last weekend, asking a federal judge in New York to strike down two executive orders targeting universities and “foreign national” protesters. The government has not yet filed a formal response to the federal complaint. CNN reached out to the Department of Homeland Security and attorneys representing the Trump administration in the lawsuit for comment and has not yet received a response. Taal’s attorney said the Trump administration responded to Taal’s lawsuit “by sending agents to stake out his house.” “When we asked the Court to enjoin the administration from detaining Mr. Taal as the case progresses, the administration responded by ordering him to surrender to ICE. This does not happen in a democracy,” said Lee in a statement to CNN. “We are outraged, and every American should be too.” In addition to Taal, the lawsuit’s plaintiffs include a fellow doctoral candidate and a professor at Cornell who are both US citizens, but say their First Amendment rights have been chilled by the threat of prosecution for protests against Israeli policies. “This lawsuit is a necessary step to preserve our most fundamental constitutional protections,” wrote Abed Ayoub, national executive director of the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee, which is assisting in the lawsuit. “The First Amendment guarantees the freedom of speech and expression to all persons within the United States, without exception.” Coombe did not immediately rule on the motion for a temporary restraining order blocking Taal’s deportation, but ordered the government to respond to the request by 5 p.m. Saturday. Taal’s attorneys will need to file a reply brief addressing any arguments made by the government, which is due by 5 p.m. on Sunday. A hearing is scheduled for 2 p.m. on Tuesday in Syracuse, where Coombe will hear the arguments and issue a ruling “in the time it takes them to render it,” according to Lee. Taal’s efforts to fight potential deportation come only two weeks after Columbia University graduate and pro-Palestinian protest leader Mahmoud Khalil was detained by Immigration and Customs Enforcement. A judge has blocked efforts to expel him from the country, but it was the first prominent move in a series of immigration actions aimed at college students and faculty.  
