Fact check: Trump exaggerates trade deficits, his 2024 vote total, Ukraine aid, border crossings and fentanyl deaths

Daniel Dale

President Donald Trump made at least nine false claims in his Friday remarks to reporters in the Oval Office – including a series of wildly exaggerated statistics on a variety of topics. Trump used inaccurate figures for the number of votes he received in the 2024 presidential election, US aid to Ukraine, the number of migrants who entered the US during the Biden administration, the US trade deficits with China and Canada, and annual US fentanyl deaths. He also wrongly declared, again, that Honda announced it is building a new factory in Indiana. He repeated his years-old baseless claim that NATO would no longer have existed if not for his first presidency. He told his familiar unsubstantiated story about large numbers of migrants having come from jails in “the Congo” and elsewhere. And he once more discussed Canada’s dairy tariffs without mentioning a critical fact about them. While criticizing a federal judge who is presiding over a challenge to one of Trump’s immigration actions, Trump exaggerated his own vote total in the 2024 election – saying of the judge, “He didn’t run for president. He didn’t get much more than 80 million votes.” Trump received about 77.3 million votes in the 2024 election, his highest total in the three consecutive presidential elections in which he was a candidate. There is no basis for his repeated suggestions that the 2024 count was inaccurate. Honda and Indiana: While touting his use of tariffs on imported goods to get companies to increase their US manufacturing, Trump claimed, as he did in his address to Congress early this month, that Honda is building a new factory in Indiana. “We have a big one: Honda is building – just announced – a really big plant in Indiana,” he said Friday. But Honda has made no such announcement. Reuters, citing anonymous sources, reported early this month that Honda is planning to build its next-generation Civic hybrid in Indiana rather than Mexico as originally planned. The report did not say Honda was building a new factory; it already builds vehicles at an existing Indiana plant. In a statement to CNN on Wednesday, Honda thanked Trump “for recognizing our commitment to manufacturing vehicles in America” and touted its investment of “over $3 billion in advanced vehicle manufacturing in America in just the past three years” – but also noted, “Honda did not announce plans for a new plant in the U.S. at this time.” Honda said Friday, after Trump’s latest remarks, that this statement still stands. The US trade deficit with China: Trump repeated his false claim that the US trade deficit with China has hit $1 trillion or more, again blaming former President Joe Biden for this supposed situation. Trump said: “We have a trillion-dollar deficit, because of Biden, with President Xi; more than that – I mean, I’ve heard $1.2 trillion.” Those numbers are not close to accurate. In fact, official federal figures show that the 2024 deficit with China in goods and services trade was $263.3 billion. That’s up from $252.1 billion in 2023 – but lower than in every year of Trump’s first presidency. The 2024 deficit with China in goods trade alone was $295.2 billion. The US trade deficit with Canada: Reiterating his desire for Canada to become the 51st US state, Trump repeated his false claim that “it costs us $200 billion a year in subsidy to keep Canada afloat.” Trump has repeatedly used this $200 billion figure to describe the US trade deficit with Canada, which is actually far lower than that; official US statistics show the 2024 deficit with Canada in goods and services trade was $35.7 billion and $70.6 billion in goods trade alone. Even if he was this time using the word “subsidy” more broadly, there is no basis for the claim. Canada’s dairy tariffs: Trump correctly noted that Canada has 270% tariffs on some US dairy products. However, he failed to mention that Canada’s high dairy tariffs only kick in after the US hits a certain Trump-negotiated quantity of tariff-free dairy sales to Canada each year – and as the US dairy industry acknowledges, the US is not hitting its zero-tariff maximum in any category of dairy product, so the tariffs aren’t being applied. You can read more here.  
