Inside the hours of terror among surviving roommates the night of the Idaho student murders

Taylor Romine

It was around 4 a.m. when University of Idaho student Dylan Mortensen said she was woken up by strange noises in her off-campus house. She and her roommates had returned earlier from a typical Saturday night out in the college town when the sounds spurred a night of terror with a flurry of panicked texts and unanswered calls. Three of Mortensen’s roommates and a boyfriend of one of the students would be found dead inside the house the next morning on November 13, 2022 — stabbed to death with no signs of a break-in. DNA from the brutal slayings ultimately led to the arrest of 30-year-old criminology graduate student Bryan Kohberger. A not guilty plea has been entered on his behalf for the murders of Kaylee Goncalves, Madison Mogen, Xana Kernodle and Ethan Chapin. Mortensen and another roommate, Bethany Funke, are the only two from inside the three-story Moscow, Idaho, house to survive. Now, as Kohberger’s trial nears over two years later, the personal accounts and phone activity from the two surviving roommates provide more insight into what they say happened in the early morning hours of the murders as the defense attempts to discredit their testimony and call into question why they waited eight hours to call 911. Court documents paint a picture of a night filled with odd sounds, unknown voices, panicked texts, unanswered calls and a shadowy figure in the hallway – all in the setting of a college town that hadn’t experienced a murder since 2015. Not much is known about Mortensen and Funke, whose phone activity and personal accounts were revealed in court documents in the last several weeks. A wide-ranging gag order in the case prevents them from speaking publicly about their experience. While the defense tries to show through their filings the two surviving roommates spent an inordinate amount of time on their phones before calling 911 – an attempt to call into question their timeline of events – a psychological expert says a multitude of factors could’ve played into this delay. “When we are faced with trauma or fear, we all have different response systems, and there’s no one right response system,” said Elizabeth Cauffman, a psychological science professor at the University of California, Irvine. While a complete picture of that morning has yet to form, the surviving roommates’ accounts and documentation shed light on what the housemates endured in a case shrouded with mystery and speculation.  
