Principled and fair Judge Boasberg had nonpartisan record before facing Trump’s fury

Marshall Cohen and Casey Gannon

As the chief judge for the federal court in Washington, DC, Boasberg is well-liked in wonky legal circles and in the courthouse community. He’s a former law school roommate of Brett Kavanaugh and his personality has poked through his rulings with quirky uses of Star Trek quotes and Fugees lyrics.Even with 23 years as a judge in DC, Boasberg is very far from a household name. That all changed last week when Boasberg was randomly assigned a case that put him at a loggerheads with President Donald Trump and his administration’s efforts to use colonial-era laws and send undocumented immigrants to a notorious prison in El Salvador. His attempts to reign in Trump administration officials who appeared to violate his orders with controversial deportation flights to El Salvador earned him the unwanted position of being the target of Trump’s red-hot fury. In a series of social media posts, Trump smeared Boasberg as a “Radical Left Lunatic Judge” and called for his impeachment, drawing a rare rebuke from Chief Justice John Roberts. You wouldn’t know it from Trump’s angry reaction, but plenty of Boasberg’s past rulings and actions have actually aligned with the president’s political interests. Boasberg was known for giving lenient punishments to January 6 rioters. In Trump’s first term, he released FISA court materials that exposed huge problems with the FBI’s probe into connections between Trump’s 2016 campaign and Russia’s election meddling. He also paved the way for conservative groups to obtain some of Hillary Clinton’s emails from her private server. He’s also currently presiding over another high-profile and consequential federal cases: the Federal Trade Commission’s lawsuit against Meta, the parent company of Facebook. “Boasberg is the opposite of a radical judge,” one former Justice Department prosecutor, who tried several January 6 cases in front of Boasberg, told CNN. “He was always fair and principled. You knew when you went into court with him, that he was going to follow the rules. He was very predictable because he followed the law. He is not a rash judge at all.” Trump all week has complained about Boasberg, calling him “a Grandstander, looking for publicity,” and saying Friday in the Oval Office that he’s “sitting behind a bench and has no idea what’s going on.” The militant rhetoric from senior Trump officials about disregarding Boasberg’s orders and in-court stonewalling from Justice Department lawyers have raised the specter of a brewing constitutional crisis. Trump says he sees the moment as a crisis as well – but one of Boasberg’s making, and it’s endangering American lives. Other White House aides said Boasberg was leading “the gravest assault on democracy” and that he committed an “egregious abuse of the bench.” In some ways, the controversy isn’t really about Boasberg. It’s Trump who has a history of bashing any judge that rules against him – and praising anyone that rules in his favor. And as often happens amid these disputes, pro-Trump influences have followed up his public outbursts with increasingly personal attacks about Boasberg’s family and doxing-esque details about his home in DC. Still, it’s not every day that the chief justice speaks out to defend a single lower-court judge. Even after Roberts’ public consternation, Trump continued attacking Boasberg and some House Republicans filed articles of impeachment that will likely go nowhere. But their ire is perhaps misplaced. Sources told CNN that they’ve never seen Boasberg as a partisan actor. He has handed down plenty of Trump-favorable rulings. Boasberg, 62, was appointed to the DC district court by President Barack Obama and was previously named to DC’s local courts by President George W. Bush. “Remember who becomes federal judges – people who are willing to take a tenfold pay cut to spend the rest of their lives resolving impossible legal questions,” said CNN legal analyst Elliot Williams, who clerked for two federal judges. “It’s just not a community that seeks out the spotlight. I don’t think there’s a federal judge in America who relishes being tweeted about.” Like most judges, Boasberg rarely speaks to the press and does not comment about cases. When he took the reins as chief judge in 2023, after his colleague Beryl Howell stepped aside, Boasberg emphasized that they prefer to work quietly, behind the scenes. “Neither of us will be Time’s person of the year,” Boasberg told CNN at the time.