US track star says she feels ‘defeated’ after Trump’s move against trans athletes

Brynn Gingras and Bonney Kapp

She’s a two-time All American in 200- and 400-meter races. A college athlete used to winning, with a goal of making the 2032 US Olympic team. But 21-year-old Sadie Schreiner says she feels “defeated.” Not by the sport she loves or the physical rigors of the training but by the shifting rules on transgender athletes that have left her running alone around the track or now not running competitively at all. But she won’t stop. “I don’t know what would happen if I don’t have track and field, and I’m not going to see that reality,” Schreiner insisted. Schreiner knew when she was young that her physical body didn’t match her gender and began transitioning while in high school. She takes 8 pills daily to keep her testosterone levels low enough so they aren’t detectable on lab tests. “(The hormone therapy) shrank my ligaments. It’s made me shorter. It’s made me weaker. It’s lessened my muscles. It’s redistributing my fat. It’s lowered my lung capacity,” Schreiner explained. “My biology is fundamentally different than a cis man.” Her NCAA 24:12 personal best for the 200 meters puts her in the top tier of her age group but she said she’s a wholly different athlete than the high school kid who ran in boys’ races. “I am now 20% slower than I was in 8th grade.” Undetectable levels of testosterone used to be the standard to compete in NCAA competitions. Schreiner says she makes other accommodations too: “I don’t even change in the locker rooms.” But there’s nothing more she can do to run in college events – the competitive home of young US athletes – since the NCAA governing body followed President Donald Trump’s executive order titled “Keeping Men Out of Women’s Sports” with a rule change limiting participation in women’s sports to those assigned female at birth. She switched to meets organized by USA Track & Field – the national governing body for the sport – which holds competitions across the country for all ages and skill levels. It was the only place Schreiner was allowed to compete, isolated from her teammates and coaches. In some races, she ran around the track alone, with no competition in her age group, which she called “brutal.” “I am literally racing against me, instead of racing at these college meets, at the competitive levels I should be.” Schreiner’s support base is now largely limited to her parents and boyfriend Ace. Her dad, Greg Schreiner, said: “She’s in a completely different spot than she was prior to her transition … and (transgender athletes) all just get looped together in the same conversation. At a meet in Maine earlier this month, entrants alongside Schreiner included elementary and high school children and seniors. She ran the indoor track alone, in a different class to the others. Between her two races, Schreiner checked the USATF’s rules on transwomen competing. Two nights earlier she’d received an email stating she didn’t meet requirements for transgender athletes. Sure enough, the rules posted online had become more restrictive, matching regulations from World Athletics. Essentially, another ban was in effect. “They silently changed their policy,” she said. “It means there’s likely no more meets in the United States that I could run.” The impact was not lost on Greg Schreiner either. “It’s sad, you know, you want to be excited about and celebrate your kids. I love to watch Sadie run and thinking that this is potentially her last race in this country, you become melancholy,” he said. USATF didn’t respond to an email from CNN requesting clarification on when and why the policy changed.  
