Global travel is disrupted by Heathrow’s closure. Here’s what we know

Todd Symons, Alex Stambaugh, Jessie Yeung and Sana Noor Haq

The chief executive of London’s Heathrow Airport expects it to be running as normal by Saturday after a “significant power outage” brought one of the world’s busiest transit hubs to a complete standstill, setting off waves of global travel chaos.
“Tomorrow morning, we expect to be back in full operation, so 100% operation as a normal day,” Heathrow Airport CEO Thomas Woldbye said on Friday.
Woldbye described the airport’s closure as “an incident of major severity” as he apologized to passengers for the disruption.
After hours of delay, several flights took off from the airport on Friday night, including British Airways flights to Cape Town and Riyadh, according to tracking website FlightRadar24, adding flights from six continents were inbound to Heathrow in the early hours of Saturday morning.
British Airways said that it had been given clearance by the airport to depart eight long-haul flights from 7 p.m. local time.
Saturday’s first departing flights took off from Heathrow at 6 a.m. local time (2 a.m. ET), according to the airport’s website. Almost all were listed as on time.
British Airways said it expects to operate at around 85% capacity on Saturday, but cautioned that “to recover an operation of our size after such a significant incident is extremely complex.” It warned customers to expect delays.
“This incident will have a substantial impact on our airline and customers for many days to come, with disruption to journeys expected over the coming days,” said chairman and CEO Sean Doyle, adding the airline faces deployment issues with crew being flown to different airports.
Friday’s shutdown was caused by a fire in an electrical substation in the town of Hayes, just a few miles from the airport, which disrupted the local power supply, throwing more than 1,000 flights into disarray and forcing pilots to divert their journeys in midair.
More than 290,000 air passengers could be impacted by the closure, which officials warned could spiral into “significant disruption” over the coming days as the backlog clears.
Arrivals into Heathrow were due to land from cities across the globe, including Sydney, Hong Kong, Bangkok, Singapore, Johannesburg, New York and Miami.
British utility company National Grid said Saturday morning that power had been restored to “all customers connected to” the affected substation.
A Heathrow Airport spokesperson said “repatriation flights” for passengers diverted to other airports across Europe would be among the first to leave Friday.
Authorities have launched an investigation into the cause of the substation blaze, which is still burning but is now under control. So far, there are no signs of foul play, according to police.
