Israeli strikes kill dozens as military launches first ground campaign since ceasefire collapsed

Mick Krever, Lauren Izso, Abeer Salman, Kareem Khadder, Jo Shelley and Catherine Nicholls

Israel pounded Gaza overnight, killing dozens of Palestinians, a day after launching a fresh ground campaign as part of its renewed assault on the territory that shattered the two-month-old ceasefire with Hamas.
At least 59 people died in the strikes, Gazan officials said, adding to the hundreds killed since Tuesday when Israel resumed bombing the strip.
Israel blames the new fighting on Hamas for refusing to accept revised ceasefire terms. Hamas, in turn, has accused Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of unilaterally upending the truce and putting hostages “at risk of an unknown fate.”
As well as bringing brief calm to Gaza and allowing in vital aid, the ceasefire also saw dozens of hostages swapped for hundreds of Palestinian prisoners.
The Israeli military said Wednesday that it had launched “targeted ground activities” in Gaza, partially recapturing a key area in the territory.
The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) said its troops aimed to “expand the security zone and to create a partial buffer between northern and southern Gaza.”
“As part of the ground activities, the troops expanded their control further to the center of the Netzarim Corridor,” the military said, referring to a key Israeli-demarcated strip of land that splits Gaza in half, dividing the central Gaza City and northern Gaza from the southern parts of the strip that borders Egypt.
Hamas called the latest offensive a “new and dangerous breach” of the ceasefire agreement. The militant group, in a statement Wednesday, said it remained committed to the ceasefire agreement it signed with Israel in January.
Israel’s war in Gaza has killed nearly 50,000 Palestinians, mostly women and children, according to the enclave’s health ministry, and as the war resumes, the toll is mounting.
The Civil Defense also warned of an imminent famine, as Israel’s nearly three-week long blockade of humanitarian aid worsens the already dire conditions in the enclave.
Under January’s ceasefire deal, Israel had withdrawn from the Netzarim Corridor. Although Israel withdrew from the corridor, foreign military contractors have continued to man checkpoints between northern and southern Gaza.
After the truce became effective, hundreds of thousands of Palestinians filed through the corridor by foot, car and in some cases by donkeys, with many of them returning to homes that had been destroyed after 15 months of Israeli bombardment.
The Israeli military Thursday said it was banning Palestinians traveling on the main route between north and south Gaza.
Israeli airstrikes on Tuesday killed more than 400 people in Gaza, according to the enclave’s Health Ministry, making it one of the war’s deadliest days.
Defense Minister Israel Katz warned on Wednesday that the residents of Gaza will “pay the full price” if Israeli hostages are not returned and Hamas remains able to govern in the strip.
An Israeli official said Tuesday that the airstrikes in Gaza were the first phase in a series of escalatory military actions aimed at pressuring Hamas into releasing more hostages, marking a return to Netanyahu’s view that military pressure is the most effective way to secure the release of hostages.
So far, the Israeli military has brought just eight living hostages back to Israel, out of 251 taken by Hamas and its allies on October 7, 2023. Most have been released as part of ceasefire deals in exchange for Palestinian prisoners.