Israeli Supreme Court freezes Netanyahu government’s dismissal of head of internal security agency

Eugenia Yosef, Lauren Izso, Tim Lister and Mohammed Tawfeeq

Supreme Court has frozen the government’s dismissal of Ronen Bar, head of the country’s internal security service Shin Bet, sparking anger from senior officials including the prime minister.
Benjamin Netanyahu said Friday that Israel “is a state of law and according to the law, the Israeli government decides who will be the head of the Shin Bet.”
Other ministers immediately condemned the decision. Minister of Communications Shlomo Kari said the court had “no legal authority to interfere in this. That is the government’s authority and its alone. Your order is void.”
And far-right Finance Minister Bezalel Smotrich posted on X: “High Court judges will not conduct the war or determine its commanders. Period.”
In its ruling, the court said, “Petitions shall be scheduled for a hearing before the panel (of judges) as soon as possible and no later than April 8.” It added that in the meantime that it was issuing an order “suspending the effect of the decision.”
The vote to dismiss Bar in the early hours of Friday local time was appealed just hours later by Israel’s Supreme Court.
“The government has now unanimously approved Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s proposal to terminate the term of Shin Bet head Ronen Bar,” the Prime Minister’s Office said in a statement Friday.
“Ronen Bar will end his role as Shin Bet head on April 10, 2025, or when a permanent Shin Bet head is appointed – whichever comes first,” it added.
That vote came after Netanyahu met with Bar last week and informed him that he would propose his removal.
In a video statement released on Sunday, Netanyahu said his “ongoing distrust” of Bar had led to the move. “At all times, but especially in such an existential war, the prime minister must have full confidence in the head of the Shin Bet,” Netanyahu said.
Netanyahu added that removing Bar would be necessary for achieving Israel’s war goals in Gaza and “preventing the next disaster.” The prime minister has frequently criticized the agency, placing blame on its leaders for the security lapses that led to the Hamas October 7, 2023, attacks that killed more than 1,200 people.
Shin Bet, which is in charge of monitoring domestic threats to Israel, conducted an internal investigation that determined that the agency had “failed in its mission” to prevent the attacks. But it also blamed policies enacted by Netanyahu’s government as contributing factors, such as politicians’ visits to the Al Aqsa compound in Jerusalem, “the treatment of prisoners, and the perception that Israeli society has been weakened due to the damage to social cohesion.”