Israeli outposts have proliferated in the West Bank since Oct. 7, analysis shows. Palestinians fear annexation could be next.

Allegra Goodwin, Nada Bashir and Gianluca Mezzofiore

Jihad Suleiman Al-Sawafta, 46, has lived on his farm in the occupied West Bank village of Bardala his entire life. But when Israeli settlers showed up in December, Al-Sawafta said his land, and his livelihood, shrank to a fraction of its former self.
“The settlers brought another settler here and placed him in our area. The Israelis built a road that separates us from grazing and agricultural areas, and the settlers don’t allow us to farm on them,” he told CNN.
“They crowded the area. They took thousands of dunams (1,000 square meters) from Bardala and its grazing lands,” he said, referring to his Palestinian town in the northern part of the West Bank. He added that the Jordan Valley, a fertile strip of land long considered the West Bank’s breadbasket, had been “largely emptied”of its Palestinian residents.
Israeli forces were overseeing the paving of a new road during CNN’s visit in late January. Al-Sawafta said the military maintains a 24-hour presence, providing security for settlers, making it dangerous for him to cross and tend the crops he planted in nearby fields.
Responding to a request for comment about the situation in Bardala, the Israeli military told CNN that the status of the outpost had not changed, and that the new road was intended for security forces, paved in accordance with a military order. “Palestinians living in the area were not harmed during the work,” the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) said.
Herding outposts like the one set up on Al-Sawafta’s land are often established by Israeli settlers on hilltops with a few caravans and sometimes livestock to mark their claim. Monitoring groups say they are notorious for swallowing up vast swathes of land and prohibiting Palestinian residents from moving freely. The outposts are illegal under both Israeli and international law, and the state is not allowed to finance or build on them.
The number of Israeli herding outposts has dramatically increased since Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s far-right coalition took power in 2022 on a platform of settlement expansion. The government includes ministers who are themselves settlers and want to annex the occupied territory to Israel. In the wake of the Hamas-led attacks on October 7, 2023, which triggered Israel’s invasion of Gaza, settlers have accelerated land grabs with support from the state.
Israeli herding outposts have ballooned by nearly 50% since the war broke out, according to a joint report shared exclusively with CNN by Peace Now and Kerem Navot, two Israeli advocacy groups that oppose settlements and track their development, covering data up to the end of December 2024.
Settlers established 49 new illegal shepherding outposts between October 7, 2023, and December 2024, seizing large swathes of surrounding land, according to the report which was corroborated by a CNN analysis of satellite imagery of the area.
CNN partnered with the US artificial intelligence company RAIC Labs to monitor the establishment and expansion of new outposts in the West Bank. RAIC Labs used its AI-powered platform to analyze and compare satellite imagery of the West Bank captured by Planet Labs in October 2023 and September 2024, identifying changes in the 49 outposts such as newly constructed structures, recently cleared areas, and emerging roads, which were manually verified by CNN.
Peace Now and Kerem Navot estimate that shepherding outposts, occupied by a few hundred settlers, now cover almost 14% of the West Bank. Some of the unauthorized outposts are run by extremist Israeli settlers and settler groups that were sanctioned under the Biden administration, according to the monitoring groups.
Of the total land seized by settlers in the West Bank since the 1990s using herding outposts, 70% has been taken in the last two and half years alone, the report found.
“It’s important to understand that the herding outposts are a national project, a state project. This is not a project which is initiated by individuals, it’s a project which the state of Israel is standing behind, is budgeting for, is facilitating, is protecting,” Dror Etkes, founder of Kerem Navot and co-author of the report, told CNN.
CNN reached out to several members of the Knesset, Israel’s parliament, for comment on the practice, but none agreed to an interview. CNN also requested comment from the Israeli Prime Minister’s Office, but did not receive a response.
The IDF told CNN that its “top priority was to ensure the security of all residents in the area.” It added that, through the Civil Administration, it works to enforce against illegal structures in Area C, which comprises about 60% of the West Bank and is fully Israeli-controlled, “in accordance with the operational situation assessment and with approval from the political echelon.”