Thousands of Turkish protesters defy ban over Istanbul mayor’s detention

Reuters

Thousands of Turks ramped up protests on Thursday despite a ban on street gatherings over what they called the undemocratic detention of Istanbul’s mayor Ekrem Imamoglu, as the opposition sought to pin the blame on President Tayyip Erdogan.
Protestors gathered at a municipal headquarters and police station in Istanbul, and at universities and public squares across the country, leading to some scuffles with police officers who had erected barricades and closed off streets.
Imamoglu, 54, Erdogan’s main political rival, was taken in on Wednesday facing charges of graft and aiding a terrorist group, a move that the opposition condemned as a “coup attempt” and that sparked an initial round of demonstrations and criticism from European leaders.
The move against the popular two-term mayor caps a months-long legal crackdown on opposition figures that has been criticized as a politicized attempt to hurt their electoral prospects and silence dissent, charges the government denies.
Erdogan, in his first comments on the detention, dismissed opposition criticism as “theatrics” and “slogans” for which the country had no time.
In an interview, Ozgur Ozel, chairman of the main opposition Republican People’s Party (CHP) that includes Imamoglu, said Erdogan feared facing the mayor in a vote and wanted to “take him out of the game” and cut his party’s ties with the city.
He said that any move barring Imamoglu from running for president in the next election would only strengthen the opposition’s support, adding the CHP will appoint him its candidate on Sunday at a scheduled vote.
“We believe Imamoglu will win. If his candidacy is blocked, we believe this will turn into much greater support,” Ozel told Reuters in his first interview with foreign media since the detention.
“This nation has never forgiven anyone trying to lift the legitimacy of the ballots,” he said next to a small room at the Istanbul municipality headquarters - with crowds gathering outside - where he intends to overnight until Imamoglu is released.
