Israeli outposts have proliferated in the West Bank since Oct. 7, analysis shows. Palestinians fear annexation 
could be next.
By Allegra Goodwin, Nada Bashir and Gianluca Mezzofiore, CNN

Israel’s defense minister said at the end of February that he had instructed the military to “prevent the return of residents” who had been displaced by Israel’s military operations in four refugee camps in the northern part of the territory beginning January 21. The United Nations estimated that some 40,000 have been forced to flee their homes.

There are also mounting concerns among Palestinians that US President Donald Trump may endorse annexation of the occupied territory, which is home to more than 3 million Palestinians. “We’re discussing that with many of your representatives,” Trump said in a joint press conference with Netanyahu in Washington, DC, in February. “People do like the idea, but we haven’t taken a position on it yet.”

His proposal for Gaza to be emptied of its inhabitants and developed have raised alarm among rights groups and Palestinian communities, who worry a similar rhetoric could be applied to the occupied West Bank.

Israel seized the West Bank and East Jerusalem from Jordan in 1967. It annexed East Jerusalem, which is also considered occupied under international law, in 1980.

Hagit Ofran, who works with Peace Now and co-authored the report, told CNN: “It is hard to believe President Trump or anyone in his administration would stand against the formal annexation of lands in the West Bank to Israel. No wonder the settlers and the Israeli government feel empowered to do whatever they want.”

According to the report from Peace Now and Kerem Navot, more than 60 Palestinian shepherding communities have been forcibly displaced since July 2022 – the majority of these since October 7.

At least 14 illegal herding outposts have since been built on or near land from which Palestinians were expelled just beforehand, the report said. CNN verified the establishment of those outposts by analyzing satellite imagery, detecting new dirt roads, buildings and bulldozing.

