Israel has resumed the war in Gaza. Why now?
Mick Krever
By Mick Krever, CNN


The ceasefire between Israel and Hamas, just two months old, has been shaky for some time. But that was thoroughly shattered by Israel’s bombardment of Gaza starting in the early hours of Tuesday morning.

The strikes killed many hundreds of Palestinians. Tuesday was the deadliest day in Gaza since the first weeks of the conflict that started in late 2023.

The military said Wednesday that it had launched “targeted ground activities” in Gaza and partially retaken the key Netzarim Corridor, which bisects the strip. Strikes across the Gaza Strip also continued into Wednesday, including in Al-Mawasi, which for some time has been designated a safe zone by the Israeli military, despite continued attacks there.


And Israel has again issued mandatory evacuation orders for swaths of Gaza, dropping flyers ordering civilians to move. Once again, Palestinians are being uprooted.


“From now on, negotiations will only take place under fire,” Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said in a televised address Tuesday night. “I want to assure you: This is just the beginning.”

Here’s what to know about the resumption of the conflict.

Why did Israel return to war?
The Israeli government has given different reasons.

Overnight, Israel’s defense minister Israel Katz said that the attacks were “due to Hamas’ refusal to release the hostages and threats to harm IDF soldiers and Israeli communities.”

If that sounds like the same reason Israel has given for attacking Gaza since October 7, 2023, that’s because it is. Israel’s war goals in Gaza are to return the remaining hostages taken by Hamas and destroy Hamas’ governing and military capabilities.

Later Tuesday, Israel’s foreign ministry spokesperson said that the attacks were because “Hamas rejected two concrete mediation proposals presented by the US president’s envoy, Steve Witkoff.” More on that in a moment.

An Israeli official said Israel’s airstrikes in Gaza are the first phase in a series of escalatory military actions aimed at pressuring Hamas into releasing more hostages, marking a return to Netanyahu’s view that military pressure is the most effective way to secure the release of hostages.

Since October 7, 2023, the Israeli military has brought eight living hostages back to Israel, out of 251 taken by Hamas and its allies.

Israeli domestic politics is a big factor.

The far right in Israel never liked the Gaza ceasefire, because they see it as a capitulation to Hamas. They want all Palestinians to leave Gaza, and for Israel to reestablish the settlements it evacuated in 2005.

Netanyahu needs that faction in order to govern. One far-right minister, Itamar Ben Gvir, quit the government in protest of the ceasefire. Another, Bezalel Smotrich, said he would leave if Israel didn’t return to war. That would have ripped apart Netanyahu’s government coalition.

But on Tuesday, Ben Gvir’s party – Jewish Power – announced that it would rejoin the government. That’s a huge political victory for Netanyahu and the stability of his coalition.

The return of conflict in Gaza will also distract from Netanyahu’s desire to fire the head or Israel’s international security agency, Shin Bet. That decision, announced on Sunday, has drawn calls for massive protests.


Both Smotrich and Ben Givr think that Israel has been too timid in conducting the war.

“This is a phased operation that we have planned and built in recent weeks since the new IDF Chief of Staff took office,” Smotrich said on Tuesday. “And with God’s help, it will look completely different from what has been done so far.”