Israeli troops withdraw from Khan Younis, 6 months into the conflict. Catch up on the latest
From CNN staff

The Israeli military said Sunday it is withdrawing its troops from the southern city of Khan Younis.

They are now stationed on the border of Gaza and Israel. The withdrawal — which comes on the six-month anniversary of the October 7 Hamas attacks — could have an impact on the ceasefire talks scheduled in Cairo on Sunday, with both an Israeli and a Hamas delegation due to attend.

It’s unclear what the movement means for the Israeli military’s planned operation in Rafah, but the withdrawal of troops from Khan Younis doesn’t detract from the size of Israel’s forces that remain inside Gaza. There are still significant forces operating in the north of the enclave. A White House official said the withdrawal is primarily so troops can “rest and refit,” and not necessarily a signal of any future operation.

Israeli public broadcaster and CNN affiliate Channel 11 reported that the remaining forces would be located along the so-called Netzarim Corridor, which splits the Gaza Strip in two.

Here are the latest developments:

Death toll in Gaza: The death toll in the Gaza Strip since October 7 has risen to at least 33,175, the Ministry of Health in the enclave reported Sunday. The ministry added that 75,886 people have been injured in that timeframe. CNN cannot independently verify these numbers.
Aid plans: Initial plans for humanitarian goods to enter Gaza on Sunday via the Erez crossing for the first time since October 7 have been delayed, an Israeli official tells CNN. Meanwhile, the United Kingdom has deployed a Navy ship to boost aid into Gaza, as it joins international efforts to set up a new maritime corridor from Cyprus, British Foreign Secretary David Cameron said in a statement Saturday.
Israel targeting Hezbollah: The Israel Defense Forces said it struck a Hezbollah military compound as well as a command center in southern Lebanon on Sunday. The military said in a statement that it is “preparing to move from defence to attack” regarding operations on its northern border, where it has engaged in intensified skirmishes with Hezbollah, one of Iran’s proxies, since the outbreak of war in Gaza.
Fallout from Iranian embassy strike: Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer said Sunday that the US is prepared to “respond swiftly if necessary” against any attacks by Iran or its proxies. The US is on high alert and actively preparing for a “significant” attack that could come as soon as this week by Iran targeting Israeli or American assets in the Middle East, in response to Israel’s strike in Damascus that killed top Iranian commanders, a senior administration official told CNN.
UK support for Israel: The United Kingdom’s backing for Israel is “not unconditional,” the British foreign secretary said in an op-ed published in the Sunday Times. Cameron said Israel “must abide” by humanitarian laws in Gaza, adding that Hamas is the “barrier to ending” the brutal conflict.
Treatment of detained Palestinians: A doctor at a field hospital for detained Palestinians at an Israeli army base has described “deplorable conditions” and “routine” amputations due to handcuff injuries, according to an exclusive report from the newspaper Haaretz.
Anti-government protests in Israel: Protesters once again took to the streets of Tel Aviv, Caesarea and Haifa on Saturday, demanding the resignation of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and early elections.