Russian strikes injure scores in Ukraine as US and Kremlin officials meet for ceasefire talks
Angus Watson Lauren Kent
By Angus Watson, Anna Chernova, Lauren Kent and Daria Tarasova-Markina, CNN
 4 minute read 
Updated 4:52 PM EDT, Mon March 24, 2025

CNN
 — 
A United States delegation met Monday with Kremlin negotiators in Saudi Arabia, where the Trump administration is pushing for progress toward a ceasefire in separate talks with Russia and Ukraine, just as Russian strikes injured scores of people in Ukraine, including children.

Talks between Russian and US officials concluded late Monday evening after more than 12 hours, the state-run Russian news agency RIA Novosti said.

The high-stakes meeting came one day after discussions between a US contingent – led by officials from the State Department, the National Security Council and members of Ukraine Special Envoy Keith Kellogg’s team – and Ukraine’s Defense Minister Rustem Umerov, which were described by the latter as “productive and focused.”

The Kremlin said earlier that “the issue of the Black Sea Initiative and all aspects related to its renewal,” would be at the top of the agenda of Monday’s talks.

Earlier in the war, the so-called Black Sea Grain Initiative enabled the safe export of Ukrainian grain through Black Sea waters. Russia withdrew from that agreement, which was brokered by Turkey and the United Nations, in 2023, complaining that Russia faced obstacles exporting its own food.

Washington’s delegation – led by real estate tycoon-turned-diplomat Steve Witkoff – is eyeing a potential maritime ceasefire in the Black Sea and hoping that some of the initial positivity in peace talks can be translated into a broader 30-day truce and longer-term negotiations. But a wide gulf in expectations exists between Russia, Ukraine and their US interlocutors.


Russian attack on Sumy injures dozens
As talks continue, so do the attacks on Ukraine, where Russian strikes have killed at least four civilians in the last 24 hours, according to regional officials on Monday morning, and injured dozens more – including a pregnant woman.

On Monday, a Russian missile strike on a “densely populated” residential area in the northeastern Ukrainian city of Sumy injured 88 people, including at least 17 children, Ukrainian officials said. Acting Sumy Mayor Artem Kobzar said on Telegram: “The city’s residential sector and infrastructure facilities, including children’s facilities and a hospital, were damaged.”

Russian President Vladimir Putin offered to temporarily halt attacks on energy targets in Ukraine after a lengthy telephone call with US counterpart Donald Trump last week, but has continued to bombard civilian targets. Ukraine has also fired back at Russia.

Russia and Ukraine traded blame on Friday over an attack on a gas metering station that lies in Russia’s Kursk region, just a few hundred meters from their shared border.

At Monday’s talks at the Ritz Carlton Hotel in Riyadh, the Russian delegation included seasoned Kremlin diplomat Grigory Karasin and former spy chief Sergey Beseda, according to Russian state media. Beseda is viewed by many in Ukraine as a hard-nosed nationalist and early supporter of Russia’s full-scale invasion in February 2022.

“We should not so much wait for breakthroughs as understand that work is underway in a number of areas,” Russian foreign ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova said Monday of the negotiations.

Ukraine’s Umerov said Monday that “another meeting with the US delegation is planned” in Saudi Arabia.

The trust deficit on the Ukrainian side has not been helped by Witkoff’s recent rhetorical support for many of Russian President Vladimir Putin’s maximalist positions ahead of talks. Speaking to podcast host Tucker Carlson on Sunday, Witkoff appeared to show some sympathy toward Russia’s territorial ambitions in Ukraine, describing the four regions Russia wants to formally annex — Kherson, Zaporizhzhia, Donetsk and Luhansk — as “Russian speaking.”

“There have been referendums where the overwhelming majority of the people have indicated that they want to be under Russian rule,” he said.

Russia held the referendums in occupied areas of the four territories in September 2022. The votes were widely viewed as a sham and heavily criticized by the US at the time as well as by allies in Europe.

“The Russians are de facto in control of these territories. The question is: Will the world acknowledge that those are Russian territories?” Witkoff asked Sunday. “Can (Ukrainian President Volodymyr) Zelensky survive politically if he acknowledges this? This is the central issue in the conflict.”

Moscow says a ceasefire will not be possible unless Kyiv agrees not to use it to resupply or reorganize its troops. It has also publicly voiced key demands such as Ukraine never being allowed to join NATO.

Speaking Sunday night, Zelensky put the responsibility on Putin to end the war.

“The one who brought this war must take it away,” the Ukrainian president said.

This story has been updated with additional developments.

CNN’s Mariya Knight and Olivia Kemp contributed to this report.