The music festival packing list you need, according to experts

By Emily Pennington, CNN Underscored


Music festival packing list quick picks
A camping tent: Coleman Skydome Darkroom 4-Person Tent

A camping chair: REI Co-op Flexlite Camp Chair

A packable dinnerware set: Sea to Summit Passage Dinnerware Set

A way to keep hydrated: CamelBak Hydrobak Light Bike Hydration Backpack

Music festival season is upon us, and with it the annual question: What the heck do I need on my packing list? When you’re not jamming out in your psychedelic onesie or waiting in the ever-expanding Porta-Potty line, you’ll want to be sure you have a solid camp setup, kitchen utensils and accessories to keep you cool, hydrated and able to sleep so that your dance stamina sustains itself for several days.

We asked some of our favorite festival performers, creators and attendees what they always toss into their car before heading out to play and dance the weekend away. The result? An expert-backed list of survival essentials that even the most seasoned festival-goer will want to read. Below, our top picks for must-have festival gear.

How do I prepare for my first music festival?
First things first: If you’re going to attend a music or arts festival this season, you’ll want to come prepared for heat, hunger and noise. All three of these can make something as simple as getting a good night’s sleep a chore and a half, so selecting a bombproof tent, comfortable sleeping pad and warm sleeping bag is paramount. Next, make sure you pack a solid set of earplugs and a black-out eye mask and that you have a portable fan in your cozy shelter so that you can sleep in well past sunrise, which always comes too soon. We’ve consistently had the warmest summers on record for the last several years, and as such, the heat and perpetual sun that plague most music festivals have only gotten worse. It’s more important than ever to stay hydrated, drink electrolytes and cool down your body with a water-soaked Buff or bandana.


Braving the elements in the outdoors is no joke. We’ve consistently had the warmest summers on record for the last several years, and as such, the heat and perpetual sun that plague most music festivals have only gotten worse. It’s more important than ever to stay hydrated, drink electrolytes and cool down your body with a water-soaked Buff or bandana.

What is the best food to pack for a music festival?
Even if you plan on chowing down on assorted goods from the food vendors around the festival map, it’s nice to have a small camp stove, table, chairs, bowls and a utensil set for breakfasts and midnight snacks back at your home away from home. We made sure to put a few of our top picks for in-camp lounging below too.
